#  Intel® Graphics Driver Backports for Linux® OS (intel-gpu-i915-backports)

This branch provides i915 driver source code backported for SUSE® Linux® Enterprise Server to enable intel discrete GPUs support.

We are using [backport project](https://backports.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) to generate out of tree i915 kernel module source codes.

This repo is a code snapshot of particular version of backports and does not contain individual git change history.

# Branches
 suse/main will point to the currently supported version of SUSE® Linux® Enterprise Server.
 
 We will add a new branch suse/sles<x.y> whenever a version is deprecated or moved to the maintenance phase.

 **NOTE: For sles 15sp4, please use [backport/main](https://github.com/intel-gpu/intel-gpu-i915-backports/tree/backport/main) branch.**
  
# Supported Version/kernel
  our current backport is based on **SUSE® Linux® Enterprise Server 15SP3**. We are using the header of the latest available kernel at the time of backporting. However, it may not be compatible with the latest version at the installation time.
  Please refer [Version](https://github.com/intel-gpu/intel-gpu-i915-backports/blob/suse/main/versions)
  file to check the BASE_KERNEL_NAME. It will point to the kernel version which is being used during backporting.

 In case of an issue with the latest kernel, please install the kernel version pointed by BASE_KERNEL_NAME.

    sudo zypper ref -s && sudo zypper install -y kernel-default-<BASE_KERNEL_VERSION> \
    kernel-syms-<BASE_KERNEL_VERSION>

    example:
        sudo zypper ref -s && sudo zypper install -y kernel-default-5.3.18-150300.59.49.1 \
        kernel-syms-5.3.18-150300.59.49.1

# Product Releases:
Please refer [Releases](https://dgpu-docs.intel.com/releases/index.html)

 
# Prerequisite
we have dependencies on the following packages
  - dkms (only for dkms build)
  - make
  - linux-glibc-devel
  - lsb-release
  - rpm-build

        sudo zypper install dkms make linux-glibc-devel lsb-release rpm-build

# Dependencies

This driver is part of a collection of kernel-mode drivers that enable support for Intel graphics. The backports collection within https://github.com/intel-gpu includes:

- [Intel® Graphics Driver Backports for Linux](https://github.com/intel-gpu/intel-gpu-i915-backports) - The main graphics driver (includes a compatible DRM subsystem and dmabuf if necessary)
- [Intel® Converged Security Engine Backports](https://github.com/intel-gpu/intel-gpu-cse-backports) - Converged Security Engine
- [Intel® Platform Monitoring Technology Backports](https://github.com/intel-gpu/intel-gpu-pmt-backports/) - Intel Platform Telemetry
- [Intel® GPU firmware](https://github.com/intel-gpu/intel-gpu-firmware) - Firmware required by intel GPUs.

Each project is tagged consistently, so when pulling these repos, pull the same tag.

# Package Creation
Backports support two different kinds of packaging.
1) Dynamic Kernel Module Support(DKMS) Packages
2) Binary Packages

## DKMS package creation
DKMS package consists of source required to build and install ko files agains kernel dynamically.
We need to create dmabuf and i915 dkms packages using the below command.
```
    make dkmsrpm-pkg
```
 Above  will create rpm packages at $HOME/rpmbuild/RPMS/x86_64/

### DKMS Installation
```
    sudo rpm -ivh intel-dmabuf-dkms*.rpm intel-i915-dkms*.rpm
    # Reboot the device after installation of all packages.
    sudo reboot
```
## Binary Packages Creation

Binary rpm's consists of pre-built ko modules for particular kernel version and flavor.
To create binary packages, Build system should be having SLES kernel and respective headers installed

### Command to build single binary rpm (combination of dma-buf,drm and i915)
```
  make binrpm-pkg
```
Generated Files:
	intel-i915-kmp-default-<version>-1.x86_64.rpm

### Command to build dma-buf binary rpm
If you want to generate seperate rpm, please use below command alternatively to binrpm-pkg.

```
  make dmabinrpm-pkg
```
Generated Files:
	intel-dmabuf-kmp-default-<version>-1.x86_64.rpm
	intel-dmabuf-symvers-default-<version>.x86_64.rpm

### Command to build i915 binary rpm
```
  make i915binrpm-pkg
```
Generated Files:
	intel-i915-kmp-default-<version>.x86_64.rpm

Note: In case of seperate rpm creation, i915 will have dependency on dma-buf and uses dmabuf-symvers package symbol file.
Installation should be done at once.

### Binary package Installation
use below command to install binary rpm
```
 rpm -ivh <rpm>
```

# Installation varification
Please grep **backport**  from dmesg after reboot. you should see something like below
```
    > sudo dmesg |grep -i backport
    [sudo] password for gta:
    [    4.042298] DMABUF-COMPAT BACKPORTED INIT
    [    4.042374] Loading dma-buf modules backported from DII_5606_prerelease
    [    4.042374] DMA BUF backport generated by backports.git SLES15_SP3_5606_PRERELEASE_220413.0
    [    4.042936] I915 COMPAT BACKPORTED INIT
    [    4.042936] Loading I915 modules backported from DII_5606_prerelease
    [    4.042937] I915 backport generated by backports.git SLES15_SP3_5606_PRERELEASE_220413.0
    [    4.049920] [drm] DRM BACKPORTED INIT
    [    4.323473] [drm] DRM_KMS_HELPER BACKPORTED INIT
    [    4.419171] [drm] I915 BACKPORTED INIT
```
